the church committee final reports
alleged assassination plots involving
foreign leaders an interim report of the
Select Committee to study governmental
operations with respect to intelligence
activities United States Senate November
20th 1975 introduction and summary this
interim report covers allegations of
United States involvement in
assassination plots against foreign
political leaders the report also
examines certain other instances in
which foreign political leaders in fact
were killed and the United States was in
some manner involved in activity leading
up to the killing but in which it would
be incorrect to say that the purpose of
United States involvement had been to
encourage assassination the evidence
establishes that the United States was
implicated in several assassination
plots the committee believes that short
of war assassination is incompatible
with American principles international
order and morality it should be rejected
as a tool of foreign policy our inquiry
also reveals serious problems with
respect to United States involvement in
Coos directed against foreign
governments some of these problems are
addressed here on the basis of our
investigation to date others we raises
questions to be answered after our
investigation into covert action has
been completed we stress the interim
nature of this report in the course of
the committee's continuing work other
alleged assassination plots may surface
and new evidence concerning the cases
covered herein may come to light however
it is the committee's view that these
cases have been developed in sufficient
detail to clarify the issues which are
at the heart of the committee's mandate
to recommend legislative and other
reforms thorough treatment of the
assassination question has lengthened
the committee's schedule but has greatly
increased the committee's awareness of
the hard issues it must face in the
months ahead these issues include
problems of de más
and foreign intelligence collection
counterintelligence foreign covert
operations mechanisms of command and
control and assessment of the
effectiveness of the total United States
intelligence effort the committee
intents nevertheless to complete by
February 1976 its main job of
undertaking the first comprehensive
review of the intelligence community a
committees mandate
Senate resolution 21 instructs the
committee to investigate the full range
of governmental intelligence activities
and the extent if any to which such
activities were illegal improper or
unethical in addition to that broad
general mandate the committee is
required to investigate study and make
recommendations concerning various
specific matters several of which relate
to the assassination issue although the
Rockefeller Commission initiated an
inquiry into reported assassination
plots the Commission declared it was
unable for a variety of reasons to
complete its inquiry at the direction of
the president the executive branch
turned over to the Select Committee the
work the Commission had done along with
certain other documents relating to
assassination be committee decision to
make report public this report raises
important questions of national policy
we believe that the public is entitled
to know what instrumentalities of their
government have done further our
recommendations can only be judged in
light of the factual record
therefore this interim report should be
made public the committee believes the
truth about the assassination
allegations should be told because
democracy depends upon a well-informed
electorate we reject any contention that
the facts disclosed in this report
should be kept secret because they are
embarrassing to the United States
despite the temporary injury to our
national reputation the committee
believes that foreign people's will upon
sober reflection respect the United
State
it's more for keeping faith with its
democratic ideal than they will condemn
us for the misconduct revealed we doubt
that any other country would have the
courage to make such disclosures the
fact that portions of the story have
already been made public only
accentuates the need for full disclosure
innuendo and misleading partial
disclosures are not fair to the
individuals involved nor are they a
responsible way to lay the groundwork
for informed public policy judgments see
scope of committees investigation
investigating the assassination issue
has been an unpleasant duty but one that
the committee had to meet the committee
has compiled a massive record in the
months that the inquiry has been
underway the record comprises over 8,000
pages of sworn testimony taken from over
75 witnesses during 60 hearing days and
numerous staff interviews the documents
which the committee has obtained include
raw files from agencies and departments
the White House and the presidential
libraries of the administration's of
former presidents Dwight Eisenhower John
Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson we have
obtained two types of evidence first
evidence relating to the general setting
in which the events occurred the
national policy of the time and the
normal operating procedures including
channels of command and control and
second evidence relating to the specific
events a Senate committee is not a court
it looks to the past not to determine
guilt or innocence but in order to make
recommendations for the future when we
found the evidence to be ambiguous as we
did in some issues we have set out both
sides in order that the evidence may
speak for itself despite the number of
witnesses and documents examined by the
committee the available evidence has
certain shortcomings many of the events
considered occurred as long as 15 years
ago
with one exception they occurred during
the administration's of presidents
now dead other high officials whose
testimony might have shed additional
light on the thorny issues of
authorization and control are also dead
moreover with the passage of time the
memories of those still alive have
dimmed the committee has often faced the
difficult task of distinguishing
refreshed recollection from speculation
in many instances witnesses were unable
to testify from independent recollection
and had to rely on documents
contemporaneous with the events to
refresh their recollections while
informed speculation is of some
assistance
it can only be assigned limited wait and
judging specific events although
assassination is not a subject on which
one would expect many records or
documents to be made or retained there
were in fact more relevant
contemporaneous documents than expected
in addition in 1967 the Central
Intelligence Agency had made an internal
study of the castro trujillo and diem
assassination allegations footnote those
studies were made at the direction of
CIA director Richard Helms to provide
him with information to answer questions
from President Johnson the president's
questions concerning Castro were
provoked by a drew person newspaper
column in March 1967 the column alleged
that the CIA had attempted to kill
Castro using the Mafia the president
also asked Helms for information
concerning possible United States
involvement in the assassinations of
Trujillo and diem end footnote that
study was quite useful particularly in
suggesting leads for uncovering the
story of the actual assassination
activity unfortunately the working
papers relating to that investigation
were destroyed upon the completion of
the report pursuant to instructions from
CIA director Richard Helms memorandum
for the record may 23rd 1967 these notes
were destroyed because of their
sensitivity and because the information
they contained had already been
incorporated into the report in fairness
to director Helms it should be added
however the
he was responsible for requesting the
preparation of the inspector general's
report and for preserving the report
some ambiguities in the evidence result
from the practice of concealing CIA
covert operations from the world and
performing them in such a way that if
discovered the role of the United States
could be plausibly denied an extension
of the doctrine of plausible deniability
had the result that communications
between the agency and high
administration officials were often
convoluted and imprecise the evidence
contains sharp conflicts some of which
relate to basic facts but the most
important conflicts relate not so much
to basic facts as to differing
perceptions and opinions based upon
relatively undisputed facts with respect
to both kinds of conflicts the committee
has attempted to set forth the evidence
extensively so that it may speak for
itself and in our section on findings
and conclusions we suggest resolutions
for some of the conflicts however
because the committee's main task is to
find lessons for the future resolving
conflicts in the evidence may be less
important than making certain that the
system which produced the ambiguities is
corrected D summary of findings and
conclusions one the questions presented
the committee sought to answer four
broad questions assassination plots did
United States officials instigate
attempt aid and abet or acquiesce in
plots to assassinate foreign leaders
involvement in other killings did United
States officials assist foreign
dissidents in a way which significantly
contributed to the killing of foreign
leaders authorization where there was
involvement by United States officials
in assassination plots or other killings
where such activities authorized and if
so at what levels of our government
communication and control even if not
authorized in fact or the assassination
activities perceived by those involved
to be within the scope of their lawful
authority if they were so perceived was
there inadequate control exercised by
higher authorities over the agencies to
prevent such misinterpretation to
summary of findings and conclusions on
the plots the committee investigated
alleged United States involvement in
assassination plots in five foreign
countries Cuba Fidel Castro Congo his I
ear Patrice Lumumba Dominican Republic
Rafael Trujillo Chile General Rene
Schneider South Vietnam and Ngo Dinh
Diem
footnote in addition to the plots
discussed in the body of this report the
committee received some evidence of CIA
involvement and plans to assassinate
president Sukarno of Indonesia and Papa
Doc Duvalier of Haiti former deputy
director for plans Richard Bissell
testified that the assassination of
Sukarno had been contemplated by the CIA
but that planning had proceeded no
farther than identifying an asset whom
it was believed might be recruited to
kill Sukarno arms were supplied to
dissident groups in Indonesia but
according to Bozell those arms were not
intended for assassination Walter elder
executive assistant to CIA director John
McCone testified that the director
authorized the CIA to furnish arms to
dissidents planning the overthrow of
Haiti's dictator Duvalier elder told the
committee that while the assassination
of Duvalier was not contemplated by the
CIA the arms were furnished to help the
dissidents take what measures were
deemed necessary to replace the
government and it was realized that
Duvalier might be killed in the course
of the overthrow and a footnote the
evidence concerning each alleged
assassination can be summarized as
follows Patrice Lumumba Congo Zaire
in the fall of 1962 CIA officials were
asked by superiors to a
Sasson a Lumumba poisons were sent to
the Congo and some exploratory steps
were taken toward gaining access to
Lumumba subsequently in early 1961
Lumumba was killed by Congolese rivals
it does not appear from the evidence
that the United States was in any way
involved in the killing Fidel Castro
Cuba United States government personnel
plotted to kill Castro from 1960 to 1965
American underworld figures and Cubans
hostile to Castro were used in these
plots and were provided encouragement
and material support by the United
States Rafael Trujillo dominican
republic trujillo was shot by dominican
dissidents on May 31st 1961 from early
in 1960 and continuing to the time of
the assassination the United States
government generally supported these
dissidents some government personnel
were aware that the dissidents intended
to kill Trujillo three pistols and three
carbines were furnished by American
officials although a request for machine
guns was later refused there is
conflicting evidence concerning whether
the weapons were knowingly supplied for
use in the assassination and whether any
of them were present at the scene and go
then diem South Vietnam diem and his
brother knew were killed on November 2nd
in 1963 in the course of a South
Vietnamese generals coup although the
United States government supported the
coup there is no evidence that American
officials favored the assassination
indeed it appears that the assassination
of diem was not part of the generals pre
kuk planning but was instead a
spontaneous act which occurred during
the coup and was carried out without
United States involvement or support
General Rene Schneider Chile on October
25th 1972 died of gunshot wounds
inflicted three days earlier while
resisting a kidnap attempt Snyder as
commander-in-chief of the army and a
constitutionalist
opposed
two military coos was considered an
obstacle and efforts to prevent salvador
allende from assuming the office of
president of chile the united states
government supported and sought to
instigate a military coup to block a end
a US officials supplied financial aid
machine guns and other equipment to
various military figures who opposed I
end a although the CIA continued to
support coup plotters up to Schneider's
shooting the record indicates that the
CIA had withdrawn active support of the
group which carried out the actual
kidnap attempt on October 22nd which
resulted in Schneider's death further it
does not appear that any of the
equipment supplied by the CIA to coup
plotters in Chile was used in the
kidnapping there is no evidence of a
plan to kill Schneider or that United
States officials specifically
anticipated that Schneider would be shot
during the abduction assassination
capability executive action in addition
to these five cases the committee has
received evidence that ranking
government officials discussed and may
have authorized the establishment within
the CIA of a generalized assassination
capability during these discussions the
concept of assassination was not
affirmatively disavowed similarities and
differences among the plots the
assassination plots all involved third
world countries most of which were
relatively small and none of which
possessed great political or military
strength
apart from that similarity there were
significant differences among the plots
one whether United States officials
initiated the plot or were responding to
requests of local dissidents for aid to
whether the plot was specifically
intended to kill a foreign leader or
whether the leaders death was a
reasonably foreseeable consequence of an
attempt to overthrow the government the
Castro and Lumumba cases are examples of
plots conceived by United States
officials to kill foreign leaders in the
trujillo case
though the United States government
certainly opposed his regime it did not
initiate the plot rather United States
officials responded to requests for aid
from local dissidents whose aim clearly
was to assassinate Trujillo by aiding
them this country was implicated in the
assassination regardless of whether the
weapons actually supplied were meant to
kill Trujillo or were only intended as
symbols of support for the dissidents
the Sneijder case differs from the
Castro and Trujillo cases the United
States government with full knowledge
that Chilean dissidents considered
general Schneider an obstacle to their
plans sought a coup and provided support
to the dissidents however even though
the support included weapons it appears
that the intention of both the
dissidents and the United States
officials was to abduct general
Schneider not to kill him similarly in
the diem case some United States
officials wanted diem removed and
supported a coup to accomplish his
removal but there is no evidence that
any of those officials sought the death
of diem himself three summary of
findings and conclusions on the issues
of authority and control to put the
inquiry into assassination allegations
in context two points must be made clear
first there is no doubt that the United
States government opposed the various
leaders in question officials at the
highest levels objected to the Castro
and Trujillo regimes believed the
accession of Ayinde to power in Chile
would be harmful to American interests
and thought of Lumumba
as a dangerous force in the heart of
Africa second the evidence on
assassinations has to be viewed in the
context of other more massive activities
against the regime's in question for
example the plots against fidel castro
personally cannot be understood without
considering the fully authorized
comprehensive assaults upon his regime
such as the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961
and operation Mongoose in 1962
once methods of coercion and violence
are chosen the probability of loss of
life is always present there is however
a significant difference between a
cold-blooded targeted intentional
killing of an individual foreign leader
and other forms of intervening in the
affairs of foreign nations
therefore the committee has endeavored
to explore as fully as possible the
questions of how and why the plots
happened whether they were authorized
and if so at what level the picture that
emerges from the evidence is not a clear
one this may be due to the system of
deniability and the consequent state of
the evidence which even after our long
investigation remains conflicting and
inconclusive or it may be that there
were in fact serious shortcomings in the
system of authorization so that an
activity such as assassination could
have been undertaken by an agency of the
United States government without express
authority the committee finds that the
system of executive command and control
was so ambiguous that it is difficult to
be certain at what levels assassination
activity was known and authorized this
situation creates the disturbing
prospect that government officials might
have undertaken the assassination plots
without it having been uncontroverted ly
clear that there was explicit
authorization from the presidents it is
also possible that there might have been
a successful plausible denial in which
presidential authorization was issued
but is now obscured whether or not the
respective presidents knew of or
authorized the plots as chief executive
officer of the United States each must
bear the ultimate responsibility for the
activities of his subordinates the
committee makes four other major
findings the first relates to the
committee's inability to make a finding
that the assassination plots were
authorized by the president's or other
persons above the governmental agency or
agencies involved the second explains
why certain officials may have perceived
that according to their judgment and
experience assassination was an
acceptable course of action
the third criticises agency officials
for failing on several occasions to
disclose their plans and activities to
superior authorities or for failing to
do so with sufficient detail and clarity
the fourth criticizes administration
officials for not ruling out
assassination particularly after certain
Administration officials had become
aware of prior assassination plans and
the establishment of a general
assassination capability there is
admittedly a tension among the findings
this tension reflects a basic conflict
in the evidence while there are some
conflicts over facts it may be more
important that there appeared to have
been two differing perceptions of the
same facts this distinction may be the
result of the differing backgrounds of
those persons experienced in covert
operations as distinguished from those
who are not words of urgency which may
have meant killing - the former may have
meant nothing of the sort
- the latter while we are critical of
certain individual actions the committee
is also mindful of the inherent problems
in a system which relies on secrecy
compartment ation circumlocution and the
avoidance of clear responsibility this
system creates the risk of confusion and
rashness in the very areas where clarity
and sober judgment are most necessary
hence before reviewing the evidence
relating to the cases we briefly deal
with the general subject of covert
action section to covert action as a
vehicle for foreign policy
implementation covert action is activity
which is meant to further the sponsoring
nation's foreign policy objectives and
to be concealed in order to permit that
nation to plausibly deny responsibility
the National Security Act of 1947 which
established the Central Intelligence
Agency did not include specific
Authority for covert operations however
it created the National Security Council
and gave that body authority to direct
CIA to perform such other functions and
duties related to intelligence affecting
the national security as the National
Security Council may from time to time
direct at its first meeting in December
1947 the NSC issued a top secret
directive granting the CIA authority to
conduct covert operations from 1955 to
1970 the basic authority for covert
operations was a directive of the
National Security Council
NSC 54 12/2 this directive instructed
the CIA to counter reduce and discredit
international communism throughout the
world in a manner consistent with United
States foreign and military policies it
also directed the CIA to undertake
covert operations to achieve this end
and defined covert operations as any
covert activities related to propaganda
economic warfare political action
including sabotage demolition and
assistance to resistance movements and
all activities compatible with the
directive in 1962 the CIA's General
Council rendered the opinion that the
agency's activities were not inhibited
by any limitations
other than those broadly set forth in
NSC 54 12/2 CIA general council
memorandum April 6 1962 a policy
development and approval mechanism in
his 1962 memorandum CIA's general
counsel made it clear that the CIA
considered itself responsible for
developing proposals and plans to
implement the objectives of NSC 54 12/2
footnote the memorandum stated quote CIA
must necessarily be responsible for
planning occasionally suggestions for
action will come from outside sources
but to depend entirely on such
requirements would be an evasion of the
agency's responsibilities also the
average person both in government and
outside is thinking along normal
and to develop clandestine cold war or
activities properly persons knowing both
the capabilities and limitations of
clandestine action must be studying and
devising how such actions can be
undertaken effectively end quote with
respect to policy approval the general
counsel said quote both in developing
ideas or plans for action it is
incumbent upon the agency to obtain
necessary policy approval and for this
purpose these matters should be explored
with proper officials in other
departments and agencies particularly in
the department's of State and Defense so
the determination can be made as to
whether any one proposal should go to
the special group or higher for policy
determination end quote
end footnote the memorandum also stated
that even in developing ideas or plans
it was incumbent on the agency not only
to coordinate with other executive
departments and agencies but also to
obtain necessary policy approval the
committee has been faced with
determining whether CIA officials
thought it was necessary to obtain
express approval for assassination plans
and if so whether such approval was in
fact either sought or granted beginning
in 1955 the responsibility for
authorizing CIA covert action operations
lay with the special group a
subcommittee of the National Security
Council composed of the president's
assistant for national security affairs
the director of Central Intelligence the
deputy secretary of defense and the
Undersecretary of State for political
affairs today this group is known as the
Forty committee and its membership has
been expanded to include the chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff during 1962
another NSC subcommittee was established
to oversee covert operations in Cuba
this subcommittee was the special group
augmented its membership included the
special group the Attorney General and
certain other high officials in
exercising control over covert
relations the special group was charged
with considering the objectives of
proposed activities determining whether
the activities would accomplish the
objectives assessing the likelihood of
success and deciding whether the
activities would be proper and in the
national interest the chairman of the
special group was usually responsible
for determining which projects required
presidential consideration and for
keeping him abreast of developments
authorization procedures however have
not always been clear and tidy nor have
they always been followed prior to 1955
there were a few formal procedures
procedures from 1955 through 1963 were
characterized in an internal CIA
memorandum as somewhat cloudy and
redacted based on value judgments by the
DCI memorandum for the record see see AP
eg policy coordination of CIA's covert
action operations February 21st 1967 the
existence of formal procedures for
planning and implementing covert actions
does not necessarily rule out the
possibility that other more informal
procedures might be used the granting of
authority to an executive agency to plan
covert action does not preempt
presidential authority to develop and
mandate foreign policy formal procedures
may be disregarded by either high
administration officials or officers in
the CIA in the Schneider incident for
example President Nixon instructed CIA
officials not to consult with the Forty
committee or other policymaking bodies
in the plot to assassinate Castro using
underworld figures CIA officials decided
not to inform the special group of their
activities one CIA operation an aspect
of which was to develop an assassination
capability was assigned to a senior case
officer as a special task his
responsibility to develop this
capability did not fall within the
special groups review of covert
operations even though this same officer
was responsible to the special group
augmented on
other matters the Central Intelligence
Agency also has a formal chain of
command at the top of the structure of
the CIA is the director of Central
Intelligence DCI and his immediate
subordinate the Deputy Director of
Central Intelligence D DCI together they
are responsible for the administration
and supervision of the agency beneath
the DCI and directly responsible to him
are the four operational components of
the agency during the period covered by
this report the component responsible
for clandestine operations was the
Directorate of plans headed by the
Deputy Director for plans DDP the
Directorate of plans was organized
around regional geographic divisions
these divisions worked with their
respective overseas stations headed by a
chief of station cos and planning and
implementing the directorates operations
the divisions which played a part in the
events considered in this report were
the western hemisphere division wh which
was responsible for Latin America the
African division AF and the Far Eastern
Division Fe in addition to the regional
divisions the Directorate of plans also
included three staff level units which
provided some oversight and coordination
of division projects the staff units had
no approval authority over the divisions
however they could criticize and suggest
modifications of projects sponsored by
divisions the three staffs were Foreign
Intelligence counterintelligence and
covert action when functioning in
accordance with stated organizational
procedures the Directorate of plans
operated under a graduated approval
process individual project proposals
generally originated either from the
field stations or from the divisions and
were approved at varying levels within
the Directorate depending on the
estimated cost and risk of the operation
low cost low risk projects could be
approved at the Deputy Director for
plans level extremely high cost high
risk projects required the approval of
the DCI covert action proposals also
required approval
the special group also within the
Directorate of plans was a Technical
Services Division
TSD which developed and provided
technical and support material required
in the execution of operations a
separate Directorate the Directorate of
support handled financial and
administrative matters the office of
security a component of the Directorate
of support was largely responsible for
providing protection for clandestine
installations and as discussed at length
in the castro study was occasionally
called on for operational assistance be
the concept of plausible denial non
attribution to the United States for
covert operations was the original and
principal purpose of the so-called
doctrine of plausible denial evidence
before the committee clearly
demonstrates that this concept designed
to protect the United States and its
operatives from the consequences of
disclosures has been expanded to masks
decisions of the president and his
senior staff members a further
consequence of the expansion of this
doctrine is that subordinates in an
effort to permit their superiors to
plausibly deny operations failed to
fully inform them about those operations
plausible denial has shaped the
processes for approving and evaluating
covert actions for example the Forty
committee and its predecessor the
special Group have served as circuit
breakers for presidents thus avoiding
consideration of covert action by the
Oval Office plausible denial can also
lead to the use of euphemism and
circumlocution which are designed to
allow the President and other senior
officials to deny knowledge of an
operation should it be disclosed the
converse may also occur a president
could communicate his desire for a
sensitive operation in an indirect
circumlocutions manner an additional
possibility is that the President may in
fact not be fully and accurately
informed about a sensitive operation
because he failed to receive the
circumlocution message the evidence
discussed below
reveals that serious problems of
assessing intent and ensuring both
control and accountability may result
from the use of plausible denial